## Interview with [Agnis Stibe](https://twitter.com/agnisstibe)

----------------------

_**Agnis Stibe**  is a director of the artificial intelligence program and a professor of transformation at [EM Normandie Business School](https://www.em-normandie.com/en/agnis-stibe). He is also an adjunct professor of Human-City Interaction at the [University of Oulu](https://www.oulu.fi/en). He is a leader of the Silicon Valley-founded Transformative Technology community in Paris (France). At the renowned [Massachusetts Institute of Technology](https://www.mit.edu/) (MIT), he rchestrated a research on persuasive cities for sustainable wellbeing. He is currently working with [MIT Media Lab](https://www.media.mit.edu/) on the SoCity project. The first decentralized prosocial platform that helps urban citizens make their communities more livable and their cities hyper-performing. Within this vision, business acceleration and societal wellbeing can be achieved through purposefully designed innovations that successfully blend technological advancements with human nature. He offers the [STIBE](https://agnisstibe.com/) method which is currently helping millions to gain confidence and build resilience against everyday circumstances. It will help you achieve stressless hyper-performance at work and certainty in life. Prof Agnis Stibe is also a [TEDx speaker](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DStzEQ1YrV0), and an MIT alum._

See the video of the podcast with Agnis Stibe on [YoutYoub](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eiV6ULeQnHU&t=261s).
 
---------------------

**People diverge in apprehending reality, and existence, and life. So, what is your purpose in life?**

I think this is the most fundamental question that every human being would be asking for themselves every morning, maybe people know that and they hope they can have a quick answer and my experience shows that, not me, and certainly not many others actually do. I would say a solid and very coherent answer to this question is quite hard, and even as a researcher and scientist, I ask this question also in my master classes, and in my talks just to inspect whether people are lost in this vast mass of information that is destructing everything or they have a very kind of coherence and systematic way how they see their own relatioship with themselves and with their lifes. Of course, I will like people to search for purpose. This is part of human nature and the purpose for me what I m really passionate about is figuring out the actual *algorithm of human change*; however, change fluctuates only up and down, but the **transformative change** is directiona and intentionall, it starts and it continues starting by smaller steps to get towards a new personal identity and usually it's not that much about learning and getting more about knowing themselves. By knowing yourself, knowing myself and then knowing how my biology, psychology, and physiology is operating, and after utiluzing that knowledge to help myself to increase my daily performance, and if I can do it with myself, I believe it can work for many other people, that's my passion, that's my purpose. My purpose encapsulates the understanding the human change to the degree that finally we can inform technology design, and especially artificial intelligence (AI) because we know rubbish in rubbish out. So, if we don't think to instruct the artificial intelligence how humans change, how can we expect it to amplify that effect?. So, my passion is understanding how humans change to being the most effective way, and translate it into better understandable for the people and more importantly for technology designers. There is technology we are surrounded by, and we will be more immersed in this in the near future, and it will be important to know who we are, to be more happier, successful and hyper performing. 


---------------------

**Eight billion people on planet earth with very different motives and capabilities, what distinguish you from others? What value you are bringing, and to whom?**


Let's start with the very essential understanding, and the right word that you were using is *value*. When I worked with a business school students, whether those who are undergrads within their grade students or those who are MBAs. Oftentimes, the business school when asked *what is the purpose of business?*, the answer is *making money*, but this is not true. **Value** should be the answer, value is the answer for everything, all transactions, relationships at work, relationship at home, relationships with your ice hockey team, whatever the best is **the value** the same applies to services and products. Therefore, if there is a company or team or person not knowing what value they bring on the table, I think that's kind of a failure and an unknown direction, the product will be quite poor, and meaningless, and sometimes helpless. Therefore, the value that I bring is based on what I answer my first question. The passion to investigate and understand the scale and bring up to a useful state that people can have a tools for transforming their own lifes, get rid of their unnecessary biases or prejudices or thinking that it is counter productive, but also for companies, companies themselves can increasing the performance via KPIs (key performance indicators) it's very simple to measure and usually the biggest drawback or barrier for companies to achieve high performance is not about technology, it's not about the process, it is not about the structure, we have been doing it for decades. It's how we can help our employees to get rid of the some of their thinking which is not counter performance of doing exactly the opposite. So, the value is not about *let's have more trainings* and *coaching* and *skills* and *practice* but instead the hyper performance, and that's the definition of my performance as removing the obstacles from human minds and there are a lot of tools that I have created that are available on my [YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/AgnisStibe), some of them are applicable for personal development, some of them are applicable organizational development and more essentially for societal development. Help the societal and communal scale we can leverage technologies for own benefits so that's the value that I bring, to the multiple beneficiaries at the same time. 

-----------------------

**Do you think that AI, or more specifically AGI, wants to be a human-like entity in the future?**.

First of all, if people find the answer to the first question what's the **purpose in life**, I think then we can successfully look at these questions. So, what would be the purpose of life, and how far is artificial general intelligence can thrive, I was raising this question by the way 5 years ago (2017), there was the Accenture internal magazine and I was wondring *what is the purpose of AGI?*, and it was exactly pinpoint it. If AI -whatever level it is-, assuming it is AGI (artificial general intelligence) that kind of tells or how people translate back to a human level, and at the capabilities and capacities that are at the level of humans, again average human I guess. Most likely today A.I doesn't know the answer because, AI doesn't have the self awareness -I assume- , I can’t judge for everything I might not know something but when we would be asking if it's still so much having the bias of developer. Ofcourse, we are developing this technology, we have trained them to learn we have trained the machine learning but then we also built neural networks that is a similar reflection how our biological neural networks functon in the brain, but still, it's a work in progress and we can see it coming I don't know how fast and how quickly. There are companies that including chips in the brain (referring to [Neuralink](https://neuralink.com/) founded by Elon Musk) and then wiring it to real human neurons. If it gets a higher speed internet to our brains and that also gives us the opportunity to learn better what's happening there. But I would say to answering your question as it was. AI, most likely will still be quite biased, biased on the creator’s intention. Because getting rid of the creator intention it is a very difficult task even for us, humans. For instance, kids grow up, they are influenced by the culture, by the parents, and by the school and that follows true and sits down and in thier neural networks and brain and similarly it will be maybe something which is really different for AI or AGI, maybe it would be able, possibly, much faster and much quicker investigate which are baiases that it has and then just delete that algorithmically, it's quite simple when possible. So, I would say the purpose will be still the one that we will be giving to it, and secondly, if we speak hypothetically there might be some occasions when AI would, possibly, come up with some freezing moments if people would ask: *Hey, AI please tell me what's your purpose* and of course, it will seek for *when can I access and find existing intelligence* and I speak about a unified intelligence. It's not about humans versus AGI, that's another perspective I can answer for another question. Overall, I believe that we are on the same continuum, we are growing as a united intelligence instead of being separate that's kind of a bias that many people have in the modern society but I would say AGI would still have very human intention driven purpose whatever that is, and we will be responsible for what that is.

---------------------

**How do you think that technology is being currently used to change the behavior of societies on a planetary scale? And what are the implications of such changes? Is technological advancements are deploying a positive or a negative impacts on human existence as a whole?** 

We need to have the comprehension of what is this relationship with the humans and technologies. People who don't want to or did not know how to see clearer this relationship. So, for me it is very simple as we just have a conversation, we are the creators, technology didn't create itself. Indeed, there will be some progress in technology, the core aspect of technology is and will be mainly supported by humans such as maintenance. Therefore, as technology gets more advanced that's kind of obvious. My observation as a scientist and as a professional, the more refined and the more sophisticated technology we developed let's take AI as an example, the deeper and darker corners of human nature we discover because if in the old days we have a hammer or a knife we can do good and bad and it is very local and the context is very small and the more sophisticated, and more far reaching technologies we develop the bigger impact, and we can also do good and/or bad. It also triggers deep in our DNA, in the memory as we evolve throught dark ages what can happen and some people have this dark side being more dominant and related to other aspects and goals (faniancial, territorial, etc.). I think that's a good part of it, we develop more refained technologies and this technology will serve as a huge mirror that's with a very detailed reslution looks back on us and highlights and exposes these dark sides, but you don't need to neglect that. We have it, it is more of question of *how much do we allow it to control who we are?* and not actually societies, we have involved to be more mindful and aware and the technologies that are used by these mindful in aware they are evoloning more than the other that are aiming to create a better and a healthy socieities. So, that's the relationship, we have constantly through technologies observing and seeing ourselves. That's it. So, if there's a questions about ethics, and how we use and how we develop technologies, please come back to ourselves. 

-----------------------

**On a lower level of transformation, one of the video you posted on your YouTube channel, you spoke about how burnout can be a fake problem. How do you think PhD student can avoid burnout? And what suggestions do you provide to avoid such mental trap?**

It also ties into the first question, knowing the answer what's the purpose and value discussed in previous questions. **Burnouts need to be understood** as well just as purpose in life and value we are bringing into the table. I would argue most of the people when they are asked 
why are they are experiencing burnout if they haven't had much experience or what were the reasons, and they usually say well **a lot of work** a lot of homework, for example, a lot of research where a lot of complexity while dealing with different softwares and especially if you ask about PhDs with SPSS, R, Python, arcgis, PLS, etc. which mastering is not always easy and data cleaning data gathering making sure that everything falls in order, same applied for the review process, academically speaking, writing journals is demanding. It's true, but that's the same thing it's kind of the same pattern of course you can have a better experiences but I'd argue, and even if I say in [my video]() that is a fake problem, burnout is real but the problem, meaning the nature of the problem and how we perceive it is faked, and if we are not clear what's the origin of the burnout then we are addressing a growing problem that's the same problem that can happen with products and services and companies in the markets, if they are asking some people okay would you like to use this service or product and they don't do it correctly they must get some insights but they might not be true when you create a product and service and the mobile app and nobody uses because it wasn't done properly. The problem wasn't understood, and this is what I teach to students in my class. I see a perspective that comes from a very natural existence which is *energy*.

An energy so we can have different kinds and those who have remembered from high school about energy conservation wall. You can create energy and you can destroy energy. If that's true and that is true, then humans are the elements, or more precisely the actors that can transform the energy from one state to another like biological energy to create outcomes or on the products and services level that means if we see that perspective clearly we are transforming energy it's a question where do we take the energy, if people don't eat for sometime they might get the low performance because of the biology and physiology but then again other distractors can come in to this equation here's a good example: people are not always satisfied with where they are or with the relationship with a colleague, or with their relationship with the job, even if you are well paid, and you don't like what I do. Here you have it, if people want to maintain the job or people want to maintain a good relationship with their PhD supervisors or they don't like the PhD topic they will be pretending for some time I don't know I don't say everybody but some people might and that creates a necessity to use some of your daily available energy to where that which I call a **burnout mask** and the larger is the distance between who we really are, what's our purpose in life, what makes you satisfied, what makes you really thriving and evolving, and the acting mask that you are presenting whether to appeal the supervisor or to your boss, to your colleagues or to relationships holistically. The larger that distance between who you are and the mask that you're presenting to everybody else it's requires energy to be maintained, and if the energy goes 20 percent, 30 percent, or 50 percent into wearing the mask how can we have enough energy to doing the tasks, how we can have enough energy to do our primary roles and deliver. I would really encourage everyone to pay attention to this perspective, and you would find more and more that's how it goes and if that's the problem.

Then we come back to the question *what's the purpose of my life?* what makes me for real and then if you align and you don't allow yourself to wear the mask, then you are better off, and even sometimes I know in the beginning of PhD process or in the first year of PhD it's not easy to know exactly what you will do you, you might have a research theme but not a very well defined subject, but be alright with that and communicating back also openly and not hiding that you don't know exactly you're kind of having your personality as it appreas instead of pretending that you kind of have an idea. That's the moment when you need to get the awareness and stuff ... okay ... non, stop, stop, stop, I need to be honest with myself first and then we also create honest relationship with everything else. Practically speaking, what it means *1) awareness:* I explain you one very clear perspective how everyone can catch themselves whether they what they say and what they do when they write email and you can feel it instincts say it, okay is it really me or am I creating a character right now we know that these things know this and therefore that's the rule number one **creating awareness** whatever we communicate break something, say something, is that really you or that's your avatar and if that's the case, that's the moment when you stop and you start to say well is this the way I want to do but if I go there and there's a high likelihood that the burnout if I stop and I just refer to myself and devise the strategies and tactics next time to be more aligned with myself when I communicate. There is also a completely different, and yes there might be some situations and it's an open avoidable some differences in opinions maybe some even complex about how things have to be done but at least it will not burn your energy on a daily basis. Ofcourse, it might have an extra energy at that moment of conversation, but the conversation will not let you sleep in a long months of pretend. So that's the strategy. 


Another practical example, people eat, the content have a great effects on human body. Pragmatically, food is a molecular combination and those molecules are doing something in our body, our cells are interacting with the food we eat, daily. I've gotten many times the question *what's good and bad?* even if you speak about healthy eating when we speak about sustainable and resilient cities or wellbeing cities, it's always a question who's cann define what's good and bad and it always comes to the people making a decision. How about looking at the core of who we are and the people look what do you mean like my name, surname, gender ... what exactly. No, let's have closer look to what are the beneficiaries of the food that you eat these are biological cells and of course we have trillions of the those: neuron cells, skin cells, liver cells, those are the beneficiaries and eat whatever you do to them you can ask a question *does it bring more value to the cell or it takes a greater value from it?* just like using substances: smoking for example it's evidently clear that it's damages human cells. So it is bad, and the same thing if you cut your arm, cells need to use energy to heal themselves so you can back in normal status. If we stop damaging the cells, cells are helping us to have more longevity. The same applies to everything, if we don't damage ourselves by allocating energy into wearing the mask, we get that energy to be creating something meaningful and valuable and that happens in a team scale, organization scale, and the societal scale.
